----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PubMed: 52 entries
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1) Title: PINet: Privileged Information Improve the Interpretablity and generalization of structural MRI in Alzheimer's Disease.

Authors: Tang, Zijia ; Zhang, Tonglin ; Song, Qianqian ; Su, Jing ; Yang, Baijian ; 

Summary:
The irreversible and progressive atrophy by Alzheimer's Disease resulted in continuous decline in
thinking and behavioral skills. To date, CNN classifiers were widely applied to assist the early
diagnosis of AD and its associated abnormal structures. However, most existing black-box CNN
classifiers relied heavily on the limited MRI scans, and used little domain knowledge from the
previous clinical findings. In this study, we proposed a framework, named as <i>PINet</i>, to
consider the previous domain knowledge as a <i>Privileged Information (PI)</i>, and open the black-
box in the prediction process. The input domain knowledge guides the neural network to learn
representative features and introduced intepretability for further analysis. <i>PINet</i> used a
Transformer-like fusion module <i>Privileged Information Fusion (PIF)</i> to iteratively calculate
the correlation of the features between image features and PI features, and project the features
into a latent space for classification. The <i>Pyramid Feature Visualization (PFV)</i> module served
as a verification to highlight the significant features on the input images. <i>PINet</i> was
suitable for neuro-imaging tasks and we demonstrated its application in Alzheimer's Disease using
structural MRI scans from ADNI dataset. During the experiments, we employed the abnormal brain
structures such as the Hippocampus as the <i>PI</i>, trained the model with the data from 1.5T
scanners and tested from 3T scanners. The F1-score showed that <i>PINet</i> was more robust in
transferring to a new dataset, with approximatedly 2% drop (from 0.9471 to 0.9231), while the
baseline CNN methods had a 29% drop (from 0.8679 to 0.6154). The performance of <i>PINet</i> was
relied on the selection of the domain knowledge as the <i>PI</i>. Our best model was trained under
the guidance of 12 selected ROIs, major in the structures of <i>Temporal Lobe</i> and <i>Occipital
Lobe</i>. In summary, PINet considered the domain knowledge as the <i>PI</i> to train the CNN model,
and the selected <i>PI</i> introduced both interpretability and generalization ability to the black
box CNN classifiers.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38694619
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2) Title: Joint transformer architecture in brain 3D MRI classification: its application in Alzheimer's disease classification.

Authors: Alp, Sait ; Akan, Taymaz ; Bhuiyan, Md Shenuarin ; Disbrow, Elizabeth A ; Conrad, Steven A ; Vanchiere, John A ; Kevil, Christopher G ; Bhuiyan, Mohammad A N ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a neurodegenerative disease that mostly affects the elderly, slowly
impairs memory, cognition, and daily tasks. AD has long been one of the most debilitating chronic
neurological disorders, affecting mostly people over 65. In this study, we investigated the use of
Vision Transformer (ViT) for Magnetic Resonance Image processing in the context of AD diagnosis. ViT
was utilized to extract features from MRIs, map them to a feature sequence, perform sequence
modeling to maintain interdependencies, and classify features using a time series transformer. The
proposed model was evaluated using ADNI T1-weighted MRIs for binary and multiclass classification.
Two data collections, Complete 1Yr 1.5T and Complete 3Yr 3T, from the ADNI database were used for
training and testing. A random split approach was used, allocating 60% for training and 20% for
testing and validation, resulting in sample sizes of (211, 70, 70) and (1378, 458, 458),
respectively. The performance of our proposed model was compared to various deep learning models,
including CNN with BiL-STM and ViT with Bi-LSTM. The suggested technique diagnoses AD with high
accuracy (99.048% for binary and 99.014% for multiclass classification), precision, recall, and
F-score. Our proposed method offers researchers an approach to more efficient early clinical
diagnosis and interventions.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38637671
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3) Title: Brain Age Analysis and Dementia Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks trained on Diffusion MRI: Tests in Indian and North American Cohorts.

Authors: Chattopadhyay, Tamoghna ; Joshy, Neha Ann ; Ozarkar, Saket S ; Buwa, Ketaki ; Feng, Yixue ; Laltoo, Emily ; Thomopoulos, Sophia I ; Villalon, Julio E ; Joshi, Himanshu ; Venkatasubramanian, Ganesan ; John, John P ; Thompson, Paul M ; 

Summary:
Deep learning models based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been used to classify
Alzheimer's disease or infer dementia severity from T1-weighted brain MRI scans. Here, we examine
the value of adding diffusion-weighted MRI (dMRI) as an input to these models. Much research in this
area focuses on specific datasets such as the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI),
which assesses people of North American, largely European ancestry, so we examine how models trained
on ADNI, generalize to a new population dataset from India (the NIMHANS cohort). We first benchmark
our models by predicting "brain age" - the task of predicting a person's chronological age from
their MRI scan and proceed to AD classification. We also evaluate the benefit of using a 3D CycleGAN
approach to harmonize the imaging datasets before training the CNN models. Our experiments show that
classification performance improves after harmonization in most cases, as well as better performance
for dMRI as input.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38370641
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4) Title: A novel CNN architecture for accurate early detection and classification of Alzheimer's disease using MRI data.

Authors: El-Assy, A M ; Amer, Hanan M ; Ibrahim, H M ; Mohamed, M A ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder that requires accurate
diagnosis for effective management and treatment. In this article, we propose an architecture for a
convolutional neural network (CNN) that utilizes magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data from the
Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset to categorize AD. The network employs two
separate CNN models, each with distinct filter sizes and pooling layers, which are concatenated in a
classification layer. The multi-class problem is addressed across three, four, and five categories.
The proposed CNN architecture achieves exceptional accuracies of 99.43%, 99.57%, and 99.13%,
respectively. These high accuracies demonstrate the efficacy of the network in capturing and
discerning relevant features from MRI images, enabling precise classification of AD subtypes and
stages. The network architecture leverages the hierarchical nature of convolutional layers, pooling
layers, and fully connected layers to extract both local and global patterns from the data,
facilitating accurate discrimination between different AD categories. Accurate classification of AD
carries significant clinical implications, including early detection, personalized treatment
planning, disease monitoring, and prognostic assessment. The reported accuracy underscores the
potential of the proposed CNN architecture to assist medical professionals and researchers in making
precise and informed judgments regarding AD patients.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38342924
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5) Title: PVTAD: ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE DIAGNOSIS USING PYRAMID VISION TRANSFORMER APPLIED TO WHITE MATTER OF T1-WEIGHTED STRUCTURAL MRI DATA.

Authors: Aghdam, Maryam Akhavan ; Bozdag, Serdar ; Saeed, Fahad ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder, and timely diagnosis is crucial for early
interventions. AD is known to have disruptive local and global brain neural connections that may be
instrumental in understanding and extracting specific biomarkers. Previous machine-learning
approaches are mostly based on convolutional neural network (CNN) and standard vision transformer
(ViT) models which may not sufficiently capture the multidimensional local and global patterns that
may be indicative of AD. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel approach called PVTAD to
classify AD and cognitively normal (CN) cases using pretrained pyramid vision transformer (PVT) and
white matter (WM) of T1-weighted structural MRI (sMRI) data. Our approach combines the advantages of
CNN and standard ViT to extract both local and global features indicative of AD from the WM coronal
middle slices. We performed experiments on subjects with T1-weighed MPRAGE sMRI scans from the ADNI
dataset. Our results demonstrate that the PVTAD achieves an average accuracy of 97.7% and F1-score
of 97.6%, outperforming the single and parallel CNN and standard ViT architectures based on sMRI
data for AD vs. CN classification.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38045324
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6) Title: A Deep Learning-Based Ensemble Method for Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease using MRI Images.

Authors: Fathi, Sina ; Ahmadi, Ali ; Dehnad, Afsaneh ; Almasi-Dooghaee, Mostafa ; Sadegh, Melika ; 

Summary:
Recently, the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease has gained major attention due to the growing
prevalence of the disease and the resulting costs imposed on individuals and society. The main
objective of this study was to propose an ensemble method based on deep learning for the early
diagnosis of AD using MRI images. The methodology of this study consisted of collecting the dataset,
preprocessing, creating the individual and ensemble models, evaluating the models based on ADNI
data, and validating the trained model based on the local dataset. The proposed method was an
ensemble approach selected through a comparative analysis of various ensemble scenarios. Finally,
the six best individual CNN-based classifiers were selected to combine and constitute the ensemble
model. The evaluation showed an accuracy rate of 98.57, 96.37, 94.22, 99.83, 93.88, and 93.92 for
NC/AD, NC/EMCI, EMCI/LMCI, LMCI/AD, four-way and three-way classification groups, respectively. The
validation results on the local dataset revealed an accuracy of 88.46 for three-way classification.
Our performance results were higher than most reviewed studies and comparable with others. Although
comparative analysis showed superior results of ensemble methods against individual architectures,
there were no significant differences among various ensemble approaches. The validation results
revealed the low performance of individual models in practice. In contrast, the ensemble method
showed promising results. However, further studies on various and larger datasets are required to
validate the generalizability of the model.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38042764
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7) Title: Application of machine learning in dementia diagnosis: A systematic literature review.

Authors: Kantayeva, Gauhar ; Lima, José ; Pereira, Ana I ; 

Summary:
According to the World Health Organization forecast, over 55 million people worldwide have dementia,
and about 10 million new cases are detected yearly. Early diagnosis is essential for patients to
plan for the future and deal with the disease. Machine Learning algorithms allow us to solve the
problems associated with early disease detection. This work attempts to identify the current
relevance of the application of machine learning in dementia prediction in the scientific world and
suggests open fields for future research. The literature review was conducted by combining
bibliometric and content analysis of articles originating in a period of 20 years in the Scopus
database. Twenty-seven thousand five hundred twenty papers were identified firstly, of which a
limited number focused on machine learning in dementia diagnosis. After the exclusion process, 202
were selected, and 25 were chosen for analysis. The recent increasing interest in the past five
years in the theme of machine learning in dementia shows that it is a relevant field for research
with still open questions. The methods used to identify dementia or what features are used to
identify or predict this disease are explored in this study. The literature review revealed that
most studies used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and its types as the main feature, accompanied by
demographic data such as age, gender, and the mini-mental state examination score (MMSE). Data are
usually acquired from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Classification of
Alzheimer's disease is more prevalent than prediction of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) or their
combination. The authors preferred machine learning algorithms such as SVM, Ensemble methods, and
CNN because of their excellent performance and results in previous studies. However, most use not
one machine-learning technique but a combination of techniques. Despite achieving good results in
the studies considered, there are new concepts for future investigation declared by the authors and
suggestions for improvements by employing promising methods with potentially significant results.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38027622
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8) Title: Conv-eRVFL: Convolutional Neural Network Based Ensemble RVFL Classifier for Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis.

Authors: Sharma, Rahul ; Goel, Tripti ; Tanveer, M ; Suganthan, P N ; Razzak, Imran ; Murugan, R ; 

Summary:
As per the latest statistics, Alzheimer's disease (AD) has become a global burden over the following
decades. Identifying AD at the intermediate stage became challenging, with mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) utilizing credible biomarkers and robust learning approaches. Neuroimaging techniques like
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) are practical research
approaches that provide structural atrophies and metabolic variations. With the help of MRI and PET
scans, metabolic and structural changes in AD patients can be visible even ten years before the
disease's onset. This paper proposes a novel wavelet packet transform-based structural and metabolic
image fusion approach using MRI and PET scans. An eight-layer trained CNN extracts features from
multiple layers and these features are fed to an ensemble of non-iterative random vector functional
link (RVFL) models. The RVFL network incorporates the s-membership fuzzy function as an activation
function that helps overcome outliers. Lastly, outputs of all the customized RVFL classifiers are
averaged and fed to the RVFL classifier to make the final decision. Experiments are performed over
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset, and classification is made over CN vs.
AD vs. MCI. The model performance obtained is decent enough to prove the effectiveness of the
fusion-based ensemble approach.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36260567
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9) Title: A CAD System for Alzheimer's Disease Classification Using Neuroimaging MRI 2D Slices.

Authors: Sethi, Monika ; Rani, Shalli ; Singh, Aman ; Mazón, Juan Luis Vidal ; 

Summary:
Developments in medical care have inspired wide interest in the current decade, especially to their
services to individuals living prolonged and healthier lives. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most
chronic neurodegeneration and dementia-causing disorder. Economic expense of treating AD patients is
expected to grow. The requirement of developing a computer-aided technique for early AD
categorization becomes even more essential. Deep learning (DL) models offer numerous benefits
against machine learning tools. Several latest experiments that exploited brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scans and convolutional neural networks (CNN) for AD classification showed promising
conclusions. CNN's receptive field aids in the extraction of main recognizable features from these
MRI scans. In order to increase classification accuracy, a new adaptive model based on CNN and
support vector machines (SVM) is presented in the research, combining both the CNN's capabilities in
feature extraction and SVM in classification. The objective of this research is to build a hybrid
CNN-SVM model for classifying AD using the MRI ADNI dataset. Experimental results reveal that the
hybrid CNN-SVM model outperforms the CNN model alone, with relative improvements of 3.4%, 1.09%,
0.85%, and 2.82% on the testing dataset for AD vs. cognitive normal (CN), CN vs. mild cognitive
impairment (MCI), AD vs. MCI, and CN vs. MCI vs. AD, respectively. Finally, the proposed approach
has been further experimented on OASIS dataset leading to accuracy of 86.2%.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35983528
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10) Title: Diagnostic accuracy study of automated stratification of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment via deep learning based on MRI.

Authors: Chen, Xiaowen ; Tang, Mingyue ; Liu, Aimin ; Wei, Xiaoqin ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a widespread neurodegenerative disease that mostly affects the elderly
population. Given its prevalence, a precise and efficient stratification system based on AD
symptomology that uses functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has great potential in the
clinical diagnosis and prognosis estimation of AD patients. It was evident that deep learning
methods have performed extremely well in the field of automated stratification of AD based on MRI
because of their high predicting accuracy and reliability.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35965800
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11) Title: Improving the Automatic Classification of Brain MRI Acquisition Contrast with Machine Learning.

Authors: Cluceru, Julia ; Lupo, Janine M ; Interian, Yannet ; Bove, Riley ; Crane, Jason C ; 

Summary:
Automated quantification of data acquired as part of an MRI exam requires identification of the
specific acquisition of relevance to a particular analysis. This motivates the development of
methods capable of reliably classifying MRI acquisitions according to their nominal contrast type,
e.g., T1 weighted, T1 post-contrast, T2 weighted, T2-weighted FLAIR, proton-density weighted. Prior
studies have investigated using imaging-based methods and DICOM metadata-based methods with success
on cohorts of patients acquired as part of a clinical trial. This study compares the performance of
these methods on heterogeneous clinical datasets acquired with many different scanners from many
institutions. RF and CNN models were trained on metadata and pixel data, respectively. A combined RF
model incorporated CNN logits from the pixel-based model together with metadata. Four cohorts were
used for model development and evaluation: MS research (n = 11,106 series), MS clinical (n = 3244
series), glioma research (n = 612 series, test/validation only), and ADNI PTSD (n = 477 series,
training only). Together, these cohorts represent a broad range of acquisition contexts (scanners,
sequences, institutions) and subject pathologies. Pixel-based CNN and combined models achieved
accuracies between 97 and 98% on the clinical MS cohort. Validation/test accuracies with the glioma
cohort were 99.7% (metadata only) and 98.4 (CNN). Accurate and generalizable classification of MRI
acquisition contrast types was demonstrated. Such methods are important for enabling automated data
selection in high-throughput and big-data image analysis applications.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35941406
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12) Title: Diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease using structure highlighting key slice stacking and transfer learning.

Authors: Ban, Yanjiao ; Zhang, Xuejun ; Lao, Huan ; 

Summary:
In recent years, two-dimensional convolutional neural network (2D CNN) have been widely used in the
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) based on structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI).
However, due to the lack of targeted processing of the key slices of sMRI images, the classification
performance of the CNN model needs to be improved.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35894542
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
13) Title: Deep Learning Model for Prediction of Progressive Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease Using Structural MRI.

Authors: Lim, Bing Yan ; Lai, Khin Wee ; Haiskin, Khairunnisa ; Kulathilake, K A Saneera Hemantha ; Ong, Zhi Chao ; Hum, Yan Chai ; Dhanalakshmi, Samiappan ; Wu, Xiang ; Zuo, Xiaowei ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible neurological disorder that affects the vast majority of
dementia cases, leading patients to experience gradual memory loss and cognitive function decline.
Despite the lack of a cure, early detection of Alzheimer's disease permits the provision of
preventive medication to slow the disease's progression. The objective of this project is to develop
a computer-aided method based on a deep learning model to distinguish Alzheimer's disease (AD) from
cognitively normal and its early stage, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), by just using structural
MRI (sMRI). To attain this purpose, we proposed a multiclass classification method based on 3D
T1-weight brain sMRI images from the ADNI database. Axial brain images were extracted from 3D MRI
and fed into the convolutional neural network (CNN) for multiclass classification. Three separate
models were tested: a CNN built from scratch, VGG-16, and ResNet-50. As a feature extractor, the
VGG-16 and ResNet-50 convolutional bases trained on the ImageNet dataset were employed. To achieve
classification, a new densely connected classifier was implemented on top of the convolutional
bases.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35721012
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
14) Title: A<sup>3</sup>C-TL-GTO: Alzheimer Automatic Accurate Classification Using Transfer Learning and Artificial Gorilla Troops Optimizer.

Authors: Baghdadi, Nadiah A ; Malki, Amer ; Balaha, Hossam Magdy ; Badawy, Mahmoud ; Elhosseini, Mostafa ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic disease that affects the elderly. There are many different
types of dementia, but Alzheimer's disease is one of the leading causes of death. AD is a chronic
brain disorder that leads to problems with language, disorientation, mood swings, bodily functions,
memory loss, cognitive decline, mood or personality changes, and ultimately death due to dementia.
Unfortunately, no cure has yet been developed for it, and it has no known causes. Clinically,
imaging tools can aid in the diagnosis, and deep learning has recently emerged as an important
component of these tools. Deep learning requires little or no image preprocessing and can infer an
optimal data representation from raw images without prior feature selection. As a result, they
produce a more objective and less biased process. The performance of a convolutional neural network
(CNN) is primarily affected by the hyperparameters chosen and the dataset used. A deep learning
model for classifying Alzheimer's patients has been developed using transfer learning and optimized
by Gorilla Troops for early diagnosis. This study proposes the A3C-TL-GTO framework for MRI image
classification and AD detection. The A3C-TL-GTO is an empirical quantitative framework for accurate
and automatic AD classification, developed and evaluated with the Alzheimer's Dataset (four classes
of images) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). The proposed framework
reduces the bias and variability of preprocessing steps and hyperparameters optimization to the
classifier model and dataset used. Our strategy, evaluated on MRIs, is easily adaptable to other
imaging methods. According to our findings, the proposed framework was an excellent instrument for
this task, with a significant potential advantage for patient care. The ADNI dataset, an online
dataset on Alzheimer's disease, was used to obtain magnetic resonance imaging (MR) brain images. The
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves 96.65% accuracy for the
Alzheimer's Dataset and 96.25% accuracy for the ADNI dataset. Moreover, a better performance in
terms of accuracy is demonstrated over other state-of-the-art approaches.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35684871
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15) Title: Spatio-temporal convolution for classification of alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment.

Authors: Turhan, Gülce ; Küçük, Haluk ; Isik, Esin Ozturk ; 

Summary:
Dementia refers to the loss of memory and other cognitive abilities. Alzheimer's disease (AD), which
patients eventually die from, is the most common cause of dementia. In USA, %60 to %80 of dementia
cases, are caused by AD. An estimate of 5.2 million people from all age groups have been diagnosed
with AD in 2014. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a preliminary stage of dementia with noticeable
changes in patient's cognitive abilities. Individuals, who bear MCI symptoms, are prone to
developing AD. Therefore, identification of MCI patients is very critical for a plausible treatment
before it reaches to AD, the irreversible stage of this neurodegenerative disease.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35636355
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
16) Title: Classification of Alzheimer's disease in MRI images using knowledge distillation framework: an investigation.

Authors: Li, Yiru ; Luo, Jianxu ; Zhang, Jiachen ; 

Summary:
Computer-aided MRI analysis is helpful for early detection of Alzheimer's disease(AD). Recently, 3D
convolutional neural networks(CNN) are widely used to analyse MRI images. However, 3D CNN requires
huge memory cost. In this paper, we introduce cascaded CNN and long and short-term memory (LSTM)
networks. We also use knowledge distillation to improve the accuracy of the model using small
medical image dataset.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35633492
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
17) Title: Deep transfer learning-based fully automated detection and classification of Alzheimer's disease on brain MRI.

Authors: Ghaffari, Hamed ; Tavakoli, Hassan ; Pirzad Jahromi, Gila ; 

Summary:
To employ different automated convolutional neural network (CNN)-based transfer learning (TL)
methods for both binary and multiclass classification of Alzheimer's disease (AD) using brain MRI.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35616643
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
18) Title: Fusing Multimodal and Anatomical Volumes of Interest Features Using Convolutional Auto-Encoder and Convolutional Neural Networks for Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis.

Authors: Abdelaziz, Mohammed ; Wang, Tianfu ; Elazab, Ahmed ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related disease that affects a large proportion of the elderly.
Currently, the neuroimaging techniques [e.g., magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission
tomography (PET)] are promising modalities for AD diagnosis. Since not all brain regions are
affected by AD, a common technique is to study some region-of-interests (ROIs) that are believed to
be closely related to AD. Conventional methods used ROIs, identified by the handcrafted features
through Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) atlas rather than utilizing the original images which
may induce missing informative features. In addition, they learned their framework based on the
discriminative patches instead of full images for AD diagnosis in multistage learning scheme. In
this paper, we integrate the original image features from MRI and PET with their ROIs features in
one learning process. Furthermore, we use the ROIs features for forcing the network to focus on the
regions that is highly related to AD and hence, the performance of the AD diagnosis can be improved.
Specifically, we first obtain the ROIs features from the AAL, then we register every ROI with its
corresponding region of the original image to get a synthetic image for each modality of every
subject. Then, we employ the convolutional auto-encoder network for learning the synthetic image
features and the convolutional neural network (CNN) for learning the original image features.
Meanwhile, we concatenate the features from both networks after each convolution layer. Finally, the
highly learned features from the MRI and PET are concatenated for brain disease classification.
Experiments are carried out on the ADNI datasets including ADNI-1 and ADNI-2 to evaluate our method
performance. Our method demonstrates a higher performance in brain disease classification than the
recent studies.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35572142
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
19) Title: Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis With Brain Structural MRI Using Multiview-Slice Attention and 3D Convolution Neural Network.

Authors: Chen, Lin ; Qiao, Hezhe ; Zhu, Fan ; 

Summary:
Numerous artificial intelligence (AI) based approaches have been proposed for automatic Alzheimer's
disease (AD) prediction with brain structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI). Previous studies
extract features from the whole brain or individual slices separately, ignoring the properties of
multi-view slices and feature complementarity. For this reason, we present a novel AD diagnosis
model based on the multiview-slice attention and 3D convolution neural network (3D-CNN).
Specifically, we begin by extracting the local slice-level characteristic in various dimensions
using multiple sub-networks. Then we proposed a slice-level attention mechanism to emphasize
specific 2D-slices to exclude the redundancy features. After that, a 3D-CNN was employed to capture
the global subject-level structural changes. Finally, all these 2D and 3D features were fused to
obtain more discriminative representations. We conduct the experiments on 1,451 subjects from ADNI-1
and ADNI-2 datasets. Experimental results showed the superiority of our model over the state-of-the-
art approaches regarding dementia classification. Specifically, our model achieves accuracy values
of 91.1 and 80.1% on ADNI-1 for AD diagnosis and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) convention
prediction, respectively.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35557839
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
20) Title: Alzheimer's Disease Classification Accuracy is Improved by MRI Harmonization based on Attention-Guided Generative Adversarial Networks.

Authors: Sinha, Surabhi ; Thomopoulos, Sophia I ; Lam, Pradeep ; Muir, Alexandra ; Thompson, Paul M ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) accounts for 60% of dementia cases worldwide; patients with the disease
typically suffer from irreversible memory loss and progressive decline in multiple cognitive
domains. With brain imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), microscopic brain
changes are detectable even before abnormal memory loss is detected clinically. Patterns of brain
atrophy can be measured using MRI, which gives us an opportunity to facilitate AD detection using
image classification techniques. Even so, MRI scanning protocols and scanners differ across studies.
The resulting differences in image contrast and signal to noise make it important to train and test
classification models on multiple datasets, and to handle shifts in image characteristics across
protocols (also known as <i>domain transfer</i> or <i>domain adaptation</i>). Here, we examined
whether adversarial domain adaptation can boost the performance of a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) model designed to classify AD. To test this, we used an Attention-Guided Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) to harmonize images from three publicly available brain MRI datasets -
ADNI, AIBL and OASIS - adjusting for scanner-dependent effects. Our AG-GAN optimized a joint
objective function that included attention loss, pixel loss, cycle-consistency loss and adversarial
loss; the model was trained bidirectionally in an end-to-end fashion. For AD classification, we
adapted the popular 2D AlexNet CNN to handle 3D images. Classification based on harmonized MR images
significantly outperformed classification based on the three datasets in non-harmonized form,
motivating further work on image harmonization using adversarial techniques.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35340753
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
21) Title: Alzheimer's Disease Classification Through Imaging Genetic Data With IGnet.

Authors: Wang, Jade Xiaoqing ; Li, Yimei ; Li, Xintong ; Lu, Zhao-Hua ; 

Summary:
The application of deep learning techniques to the detection and automated classification of
Alzheimer's disease (AD) has recently gained considerable attention. The rapid progress in
neuroimaging and sequencing techniques has enabled the generation of large-scale imaging genetic
data for AD research. In this study, we developed a deep learning approach, IGnet, for automated AD
classification using both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data and genetic sequencing data. The
proposed approach integrates computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) techniques,
with a deep three-dimensional convolutional network (3D CNN) being used to handle the three-
dimensional MRI input and a Transformer encoder being used to manage the genetic sequence input. The
proposed approach has been applied to the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data
set. Using baseline MRI scans and selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms on chromosome 19, it
achieved a classification accuracy of 83.78% and an area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC-ROC) of 0.924 with the test set. The results demonstrate the great potential of using
multi-disciplinary AI approaches to integrate imaging genetic data for the automated classification
of AD.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35310099
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
22) Title: Data-Limited Deep Learning Methods for Mild Cognitive Impairment Classification in Alzheimer's Disease Patients.

Authors: De Luna, Ashley ; Marcia, Roummel F ; 

Summary:
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is the stage between the declining of normal brain function and the
more serious decline of dementia. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the leading forms of dementia.
Although MCI does not always lead to AD, an early diagnosis of MCI may be helpful in finding those
with early signs of AD. The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has utilized magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) for the diagnosis of MCI and AD. MCI can be separated into two types: Early
MCI (EMCI) and Late MCI (LMCI). Furthermore, MRI results can be separated into three views of axial,
coronal and sagittal planes. In this work, we perform binary classifications between healthy people
and the two types of MCI based on limited MRI images using deep learning approaches. Specifically,
we implement and compare two various convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures. The MRIs of
516 patients were used in this study: 172 control normal (CN), 172 EMCI patients and 172 LMCI
patients. For this data set, 50% of the images were used for training, 20% for validation, and the
remaining 30% for testing. The results showed that the best classification for one model was between
CN and LMCI for the coronal view with an accuracy of 79.67%. In addition, we achieved 67.85%
accuracy for the second proposed model for the same classification group.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34891795
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
23) Title: Effect of data leakage in brain MRI classification using 2D convolutional neural networks.

Authors: Yagis, Ekin ; Atnafu, Selamawet Workalemahu ; García Seco de Herrera, Alba ; Marzi, Chiara ; Scheda, Riccardo ; Giannelli, Marco ; Tessa, Carlo ; Citi, Luca ; Diciotti, Stefano ; 

Summary:
In recent years, 2D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been extensively used to diagnose
neurological diseases from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data due to their potential to discern
subtle and intricate patterns. Despite the high performances reported in numerous studies,
developing CNN models with good generalization abilities is still a challenging task due to possible
data leakage introduced during cross-validation (CV). In this study, we quantitatively assessed the
effect of a data leakage caused by 3D MRI data splitting based on a 2D slice-level using three 2D
CNN models to classify patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Our
experiments showed that slice-level CV erroneously boosted the average slice level accuracy on the
test set by 30% on Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS), 29% on Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), 48% on Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) and 55%
on a local de-novo PD Versilia dataset. Further tests on a randomly labeled OASIS-derived dataset
produced about 96% of (erroneous) accuracy (slice-level split) and 50% accuracy (subject-level
split), as expected from a randomized experiment. Overall, the extent of the effect of an erroneous
slice-based CV is severe, especially for small datasets.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34799630
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
24) Title: Ranking convolutional neural network for Alzheimer's disease mini-mental state examination prediction at multiple time-points.

Authors: Qiao, Hezhe ; Chen, Lin ; Zhu, Fan ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease. Predicting Mini-mental state
examination (MMSE) based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plays an important role in monitoring
the progress of AD. Existing machine learning based methods cast MMSE prediction as a single metric
regression problem simply and ignore the relationship between subjects with various scores.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34798407
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
25) Title: Deep Learning Approach for Early Detection of Alzheimer's Disease.

Authors: Helaly, Hadeer A ; Badawy, Mahmoud ; Haikal, Amira Y ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic, irreversible brain disorder, no effective cure for it till
now. However, available medicines can delay its progress. Therefore, the early detection of AD plays
a crucial role in preventing and controlling its progression. The main objective is to design an
end-to-end framework for early detection of Alzheimer's disease and medical image classification for
various AD stages. A deep learning approach, specifically convolutional neural networks (CNN), is
used in this work. Four stages of the AD spectrum are multi-classified. Furthermore, separate binary
medical image classifications are implemented between each two-pair class of AD stages. Two methods
are used to classify the medical images and detect AD. The first method uses simple CNN
architectures that deal with 2D and 3D structural brain scans from the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset based on 2D and 3D convolution. The second method applies the
transfer learning principle to take advantage of the pre-trained models for medical image
classifications, such as the VGG19 model. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it is difficult for people
to go to hospitals periodically to avoid gatherings and infections. As a result, Alzheimer's
checking web application is proposed using the final qualified proposed architectures. It helps
doctors and patients to check AD remotely. It also determines the AD stage of the patient based on
the AD spectrum and advises the patient according to its AD stage. Nine performance metrics are used
in the evaluation and the comparison between the two methods. The experimental results prove that
the CNN architectures for the first method have the following characteristics: suitable simple
structures that reduce computational complexity, memory requirements, overfitting, and provide
manageable time. Besides, they achieve very promising accuracies, 93.61% and 95.17% for 2D and 3D
multi-class AD stage classifications. The VGG19 pre-trained model is fine-tuned and achieved an
accuracy of 97% for multi-class AD stage classifications.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34745371
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
26) Title: An Effective Multimodal Image Fusion Method Using MRI and PET for Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis.

Authors: Song, Juan ; Zheng, Jian ; Li, Ping ; Lu, Xiaoyuan ; Zhu, Guangming ; Shen, Peiyi ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible brain disease that severely damages human thinking and
memory. Early diagnosis plays an important part in the prevention and treatment of AD. Neuroimaging-
based computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) has shown that deep learning methods using multimodal images
are beneficial to guide AD detection. In recent years, many methods based on multimodal feature
learning have been proposed to extract and fuse latent representation information from different
neuroimaging modalities including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 18-fluorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography (FDG-PET). However, these methods lack the interpretability required to
clearly explain the specific meaning of the extracted information. To make the multimodal fusion
process more persuasive, we propose an image fusion method to aid AD diagnosis. Specifically, we
fuse the gray matter (GM) tissue area of brain MRI and FDG-PET images by registration and mask
coding to obtain a new fused modality called "GM-PET." The resulting single composite image
emphasizes the GM area that is critical for AD diagnosis, while retaining both the contour and
metabolic characteristics of the subject's brain tissue. In addition, we use the three-dimensional
simple convolutional neural network (3D Simple CNN) and 3D Multi-Scale CNN to evaluate the
effectiveness of our image fusion method in binary classification and multi-classification tasks.
Experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset indicate that the
proposed image fusion method achieves better overall performance than unimodal and feature fusion
methods, and that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods for AD diagnosis.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34713109
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
27) Title: Artificial Intelligence-based MRI Images for Brain in Prediction of Alzheimer's Disease.

Authors: Bi, Xiaowang ; Liu, Wei ; Liu, Huaiqin ; Shang, Qun ; 

Summary:
The study aimed to explore the accuracy and stability of Deep metric learning (DML) algorithm in
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) examination of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) patients. In this study,
MRI data of patients obtained were from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database
(A total of 180 AD cases, 88 women, 92 men; 188 samples in healthy conditions (HC), including 90
females and 98 males. 210 samples of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 104 females and 106 males). On
the basis of deep learning, an early AD diagnosis system was constructed using CNN (Convolutional
Neural Network) and DML algorithms. Then, the system was used to classify AD, HC, and MCI, and the
two algorithms were compared for the accuracy and stability of in classification of MRI images. It
was found that in the classification of AD and HC, the classification accuracy and sensitivity of
the deep measurement learning model are both 0.83, superior to the CNN model; in terms of
specificity, the classification specificity of the DML model was 0.82, slightly lower than that of
the CNN model; and that in the classification of MCI and HC, the classification accuracy and
sensitivity of the DML model was 0.65, superior to the CNN model; and in terms of specificity, the
classification specificity of the DML model was 0.66, slightly lower than that of the CNN model. It
suggested that the DML model demonstrated better classification effects on early AD patients. The
loss curve analysis results showed that, for classification of AD and HC or MCI and HC, the DML
algorithm can improve the convergence speed of the AD early prediction model. Therefore, the DML
algorithm can significantly improve the clarity and quality of MRI images, elevate the
classification accuracy and stability of early AD patients, and accelerate the convergence of the
model, providing a new way for early prediction of AD.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34712461
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
28) Title: 3D shearlet-based descriptors combined with deep features for the classification of Alzheimer's disease based on MRI data.

Authors: Alinsaif, Sadiq ; Lang, Jochen ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease that afflicts millions of people worldwide.
Early detection of AD is critical, as drug trials show a promising advantage to those patients with
early diagnoses. In this study, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) datasets from the Alzheimer's
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and The Open Access Series of Imaging Studies are used. Our
method for performing the classification of AD is to combine a set of shearlet-based descriptors
with deep features. A major challenge in classifying such MRI datasets is the high dimensionality of
feature vectors because of the large number of slices of each MRI sample. Given the volumetric
nature of the MRI data, we propose using the 3D shearlet transform (3D-ST), but we obtain the
average of all directionalities, which reduces the dimensionality. On the other hand, we propose to
leverage the capabilities of convolutional neural networks (CNN) to learn feature maps from stacked
MRI slices, which generate a very compact feature vector for each MRI sample. The 3D-ST and CNN
feature vectors are combined for the classification of AD. After the concatenation of the feature
vectors, they are used to train a classifier. Alternatively, a custom CNN model is utilized, in
which the descriptors are further processed end to end to obtain the classification model. Our
experimental results show that the fusion of shearlet-based descriptors and deep features improves
classification performance, especially on the ADNI dataset.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34598071
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
29) Title: Early Alzheimer's disease diagnosis with the contrastive loss using paired structural MRIs.

Authors: Qiao, Hezhe ; Chen, Lin ; Ye, Zi ; Zhu, Fan ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a chronic and fatal neurodegenerative disease with progressive
impairment of memory. Brain structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) has been widely applied as
important biomarkers of AD. Various machine learning approaches, especially deep learning-based
models, have been proposed for the early diagnosis of AD and monitoring the disease progression on
sMRI data. However, the requirement for a large number of training images still hinders the
extensive usage of AD diagnosis. In addition, due to the similarities in human whole-brain
structure, finding the subtle brain changes is essential to extract discriminative features from
limited sMRI data effectively.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34343744
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
30) Title: Alzheimer's disease diagnosis framework from incomplete multimodal data using convolutional neural networks.

Authors: Abdelaziz, Mohammed ; Wang, Tianfu ; Elazab, Ahmed ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a severe irreversible neurodegenerative disease that has great
sufferings on patients and eventually leads to death. Early detection of AD and its prodromal stage,
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) which can be either stable (sMCI) or progressive (pMCI), is highly
desirable for effective treatment planning and tailoring therapy. Recent studies recommended using
multimodal data fusion of genetic (single nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs) and neuroimaging data
(magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET)) to discriminate AD/MCI
from normal control (NC) subjects. However, missing multimodal data in the cohort under study is
inevitable. In addition, data heterogeneity between phenotypes and genotypes biomarkers makes
learning capability of the models more challenging. Also, the current studies mainly focus on
identifying brain disease classification and ignoring the regression task. Furthermore, they utilize
multistage for predicting the brain disease progression. To address these issues, we propose a novel
multimodal neuroimaging and genetic data fusion for joint classification and clinical score
regression tasks using the maximum number of available samples in one unified framework using
convolutional neural network (CNN). Specifically, we initially perform a technique based on linear
interpolation to fill the missing features for each incomplete sample. Then, we learn the
neuroimaging features from MRI, PET, and SNPs using CNN to alleviate the heterogeneity among
genotype and phenotype data. Meanwhile, the high learned features from each modality are combined
for jointly identifying brain diseases and predicting clinical scores. To validate the performance
of the proposed method, we test our method on 805 subjects from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (ADNI) dataset. Also, we verify the similarity between the synthetic and real data using
statistical analysis. Moreover, the experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can
yield better performance in both classification and regression tasks. Specifically, our proposed
method achieves accuracy of 98.22%, 93.11%, and 97.35% for NC vs. AD, NC vs. sMCI, and NC vs. pMCI,
respectively. On the other hand, our method attains the lowest root mean square error and the
highest correlation coefficient for different clinical scores regression tasks compared with the
state-of-the-art methods.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34229061
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
31) Title: An Improved Deep Residual Network Prediction Model for the Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Authors: Sun, Haijing ; Wang, Anna ; Wang, Wenhui ; Liu, Chen ; 

Summary:
The early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) can allow patients to take preventive measures
before irreversible brain damage occurs. It can be seen from cross-sectional imaging studies of AD
that the features of the lesion areas in AD patients, as observed by magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), show significant variation, and these features are distributed throughout the image space.
Since the convolutional layer of the general convolutional neural network (CNN) cannot
satisfactorily extract long-distance correlation in the feature space, a deep residual network
(ResNet) model, based on spatial transformer networks (STN) and the non-local attention mechanism,
is proposed in this study for the early diagnosis of AD. In this ResNet model, a new Mish activation
function is selected in the ResNet-50 backbone to replace the Relu function, STN is introduced
between the input layer and the improved ResNet-50 backbone, and a non-local attention mechanism is
introduced between the fourth and the fifth stages of the improved ResNet-50 backbone. This ResNet
model can extract more information from the layers by deepening the network structure through deep
ResNet. The introduced STN can transform the spatial information in MRI images of Alzheimer's
patients into another space and retain the key information. The introduced non-local attention
mechanism can find the relationship between the lesion areas and normal areas in the feature space.
This model can solve the problem of local information loss in traditional CNN and can extract the
long-distance correlation in feature space. The proposed method was validated using the ADNI
(Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative) experimental dataset, and compared with several
models. The experimental results show that the classification accuracy of the algorithm proposed in
this study can reach 97.1%, the macro precision can reach 95.5%, the macro recall can reach 95.3%,
and the macro F1 value can reach 95.4%. The proposed model is more effective than other algorithms.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34207145
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
32) Title: Cross-cohort generalizability of deep and conventional machine learning for MRI-based diagnosis and prediction of Alzheimer's disease.

Authors: Bron, Esther E ; Klein, Stefan ; Papma, Janne M ; Jiskoot, Lize C ; Venkatraghavan, Vikram ; Linders, Jara ; Aalten, Pauline ; De Deyn, Peter Paul ; Biessels, Geert Jan ; Claassen, Jurgen A H R ; Middelkoop, Huub A M ; Smits, Marion ; Niessen, Wiro J ; van Swieten, John C ; van der Flier, Wiesje M ; Ramakers, Inez H G B ; van der Lugt, Aad ; 

Summary:
This work validates the generalizability of MRI-based classification of Alzheimer's disease (AD)
patients and controls (CN) to an external data set and to the task of prediction of conversion to AD
in individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We used a conventional support vector machine
(SVM) and a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) approach based on structural MRI scans that
underwent either minimal pre-processing or more extensive pre-processing into modulated gray matter
(GM) maps. Classifiers were optimized and evaluated using cross-validation in the Alzheimer's
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; 334 AD, 520 CN). Trained classifiers were subsequently
applied to predict conversion to AD in ADNI MCI patients (231 converters, 628 non-converters) and in
the independent Health-RI Parelsnoer Neurodegenerative Diseases Biobank data set. From this multi-
center study representing a tertiary memory clinic population, we included 199 AD patients, 139
participants with subjective cognitive decline, 48 MCI patients converting to dementia, and 91 MCI
patients who did not convert to dementia. AD-CN classification based on modulated GM maps resulted
in a similar area-under-the-curve (AUC) for SVM (0.940; 95%CI: 0.924-0.955) and CNN (0.933; 95%CI:
0.918-0.948). Application to conversion prediction in MCI yielded significantly higher performance
for SVM (AUC = 0.756; 95%CI: 0.720-0.788) than for CNN (AUC = 0.742; 95%CI: 0.709-0.776) (p<0.01 for
McNemar's test). In external validation, performance was slightly decreased. For AD-CN, it again
gave similar AUCs for SVM (0.896; 95%CI: 0.855-0.932) and CNN (0.876; 95%CI: 0.836-0.913). For
prediction in MCI, performances decreased for both SVM (AUC = 0.665; 95%CI: 0.576-0.760) and CNN
(AUC = 0.702; 95%CI: 0.624-0.786). Both with SVM and CNN, classification based on modulated GM maps
significantly outperformed classification based on minimally processed images (p=0.01). Deep and
conventional classifiers performed equally well for AD classification and their performance
decreased only slightly when applied to the external cohort. We expect that this work on external
validation contributes towards translation of machine learning to clinical practice.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34118592
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
33) Title: DenseCNN: A Densely Connected CNN Model for Alzheimer's Disease Classification Based on Hippocampus MRI Data.

Authors: Wang, Qinyong ; Li, Yanshu ; Zheng, Chunlei ; Xu, Rong ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a common type of dementia, affecting human memory, language ability and
behavior. Hippocampus is an important biomarker for AD diagnosis. Previous hippocampus-based
biomarker analyses mainly focused on volume, texture and shape of the bilateral hippocampus. 3D
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can understand and extract complex morphology features from
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and have recently been developed for hippocampus-based AD
classification. However, existing CNN models often have highly complex structures and require large
amounts of training data. Here we propose an accurate and lightweight Densely Connected 3D
convolutional neural network (DenseCNN) for AD classification based on hippocampus segments.
DenseCNN was trained on 746 and tested on 187 pairs of hippocampus from Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) databases. DenseCNN has an average accuracy of 0.898, sensitivity of
0.985, specificity of 0.852, and area under curve (A UC) of0.979, which are better than or
comparable to state-of-art approaches.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33936504
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
34) Title: Bidirectional Mapping of Brain MRI and PET With 3D Reversible GAN for the Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Authors: Lin, Wanyun ; Lin, Weiming ; Chen, Gang ; Zhang, Hejun ; Gao, Qinquan ; Huang, Yechong ; Tong, Tong ; Du, Min ; 

Summary:
Combining multi-modality data for brain disease diagnosis such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) commonly
leads to improved performance than those using a single modality. However, it is still challenging
to train a multi-modality model since it is difficult in clinical practice to obtain complete data
that includes all modality data. Generally speaking, it is difficult to obtain both magnetic
resonance images (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) images of a single patient. PET is
expensive and requires the injection of radioactive substances into the patient's body, while MR
images are cheaper, safer, and more widely used in practice. Discarding samples without PET data is
a common method in previous studies, but the reduction in the number of samples will result in a
decrease in model performance. To take advantage of multi-modal complementary information, we first
adopt the Reversible Generative Adversarial Network (RevGAN) model to reconstruct the missing data.
After that, a 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) classification model with multi-modality input
was proposed to perform AD diagnosis. We have evaluated our method on the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, and compared the performance of the proposed method with
those using state-of-the-art methods. The experimental results show that the structural and
functional information of brain tissue can be mapped well and that the image synthesized by our
method is close to the real image. In addition, the use of synthetic data is beneficial for the
diagnosis and prediction of Alzheimer's disease, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed
framework.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33935634
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
35) Title: Use of a Sparse-Response Deep Belief Network and Extreme Learning Machine to Discriminate Alzheimer's Disease, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Normal Controls Based on Amyloid PET/MRI Images.

Authors: Zhou, Ping ; Jiang, Shuqing ; Yu, Lun ; Feng, Yabo ; Chen, Chuxin ; Li, Fang ; Liu, Yang ; Huang, Zhongxiong ; 

Summary:
In recent years, interest has grown in using computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) for Alzheimer's disease
(AD) and its prodromal stage, mild cognitive impairment (MCI). However, existing CAD technologies
often overfit data and have poor generalizability. In this study, we proposed a sparse-response deep
belief network (SR-DBN) model based on rate distortion (RD) theory and an extreme learning machine
(ELM) model to distinguish AD, MCI, and normal controls (NC). We used [<sup>18</sup>F]-AV45 positron
emission computed tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images from 340 subjects
enrolled in the ADNI database, including 116 AD, 82 MCI, and 142 NC subjects. The model was
evaluated using five-fold cross-validation. In the whole model, fast principal component analysis
(PCA) served as a dimension reduction algorithm. An SR-DBN extracted features from the images, and
an ELM obtained the classification. Furthermore, to evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we
performed comparative trials. In contrast experiment 1, the ELM was replaced by a support vector
machine (SVM). Contrast experiment 2 adopted DBN without sparsity. Contrast experiment 3 consisted
of fast PCA and an ELM. Contrast experiment 4 used a classic convolutional neural network (CNN) to
classify AD. Accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and area under the curve (AUC) were examined to
validate the results. Our model achieved 91.68% accuracy, 95.47% sensitivity, 86.68% specificity,
and an AUC of 0.87 separating between AD and NC groups; 87.25% accuracy, 79.74% sensitivity, 91.58%
specificity, and an AUC of 0.79 separating MCI and NC groups; and 80.35% accuracy, 85.65%
sensitivity, 72.98% specificity, and an AUC of 0.71 separating AD and MCI groups, which gave better
classification than other models assessed.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33537334
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
36) Title: Diagnosing Alzheimer's Disease Based on Multiclass MRI Scans using Transfer Learning Techniques.

Authors: Prakash, Deekshitha ; Madusanka, Nuwan ; Bhattacharjee, Subrata ; Kim, Cho-Hee ; Park, Hyeon-Gyun ; Choi, Heung-Kook ; 

Summary:
To prevent Alzheimer's disease (AD) from progressing to dementia, early prediction and
classification of AD are important and they play a crucial role in medical image analysis.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33504310
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
37) Title: Identification of Alzheimer's disease using a convolutional neural network model based on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging.

Authors: Bae, Jong Bin ; Lee, Subin ; Jung, Wonmo ; Park, Sejin ; Kim, Weonjin ; Oh, Hyunwoo ; Han, Ji Won ; Kim, Grace Eun ; Kim, Jun Sung ; Kim, Jae Hyoung ; Kim, Ki Woong ; 

Summary:
The classification of Alzheimer's disease (AD) using deep learning methods has shown promising
results, but successful application in clinical settings requires a combination of high accuracy,
short processing time, and generalizability to various populations. In this study, we developed a
convolutional neural network (CNN)-based AD classification algorithm using magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scans from AD patients and age/gender-matched cognitively normal controls from two
populations that differ in ethnicity and education level. These populations come from the Seoul
National University Bundang Hospital (SNUBH) and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
For each population, we trained CNNs on five subsets using coronal slices of T1-weighted images that
cover the medial temporal lobe. We evaluated the models on validation subsets from both the same
population (within-dataset validation) and other population (between-dataset validation). Our models
achieved average areas under the curves of 0.91-0.94 for within-dataset validation and 0.88-0.89 for
between-dataset validation. The mean processing time per person was 23-24 s. The within-dataset and
between-dataset performances were comparable between the ADNI-derived and SNUBH-derived models.
These results demonstrate the generalizability of our models to different patients with different
ethnicities and education levels, as well as their potential for deployment as fast and accurate
diagnostic support tools for AD.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33335244
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
38) Title: Longitudinal Pooling & Consistency Regularization to Model Disease Progression From MRIs.

Authors: Ouyang, Jiahong ; Zhao, Qingyu ; Sullivan, Edith V ; Pfefferbaum, Adolf ; Tapert, Susan F ; Adeli, Ehsan ; Pohl, Kilian M ; 

Summary:
Many neurological diseases are characterized by gradual deterioration of brain structure
andfunction. Large longitudinal MRI datasets have revealed such deterioration, in part, by applying
machine and deep learning to predict diagnosis. A popular approach is to apply Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) to extract informative features from each visit of the longitudinal MRI and then use
those features to classify each visit via Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Such modeling neglects
the progressive nature of the disease, which may result in clinically implausible classifications
across visits. To avoid this issue, we propose to combine features across visits by coupling feature
extraction with a novel longitudinal pooling layer and enforce consistency of the classification
across visits in line with disease progression. We evaluate the proposed method on the longitudinal
structural MRIs from three neuroimaging datasets: Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI,
N=404), a dataset composed of 274 normal controls and 329 patients with Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD),
and 255 youths from the National Consortium on Alcohol and NeuroDevelopment in Adolescence (NCANDA).
In allthree experiments our method is superior to other widely used approaches for longitudinal
classification thus making a unique contribution towards more accurate tracking of the impact of
conditions on the brain. The code is available at https://github.com/ouyangjiahong/longitudinal-
pooling.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33270567
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
39) Title: Construction of MRI-Based Alzheimer's Disease Score Based on Efficient 3D Convolutional Neural Network: Comprehensive Validation on 7,902 Images from a Multi-Center Dataset.

Authors: Yee, Evangeline ; Ma, Da ; Popuri, Karteek ; Wang, Lei ; Beg, Mirza Faisal ; 

Summary:
In recent years, many convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been proposed for the classification
of Alzheimer's disease. Due to memory constraints, many of the proposed CNNs work at a 2D slice-
level or 3D patch-level.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33252079
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
40) Title: Automated MRI-Based Deep Learning Model for Detection of Alzheimer's Disease Process.

Authors: Feng, Wei ; Halm-Lutterodt, Nicholas Van ; Tang, Hao ; Mecum, Andrew ; Mesregah, Mohamed Kamal ; Ma, Yuan ; Li, Haibin ; Zhang, Feng ; Wu, Zhiyuan ; Yao, Erlin ; Guo, Xiuhua ; 

Summary:
In the context of neuro-pathological disorders, neuroimaging has been widely accepted as a clinical
tool for diagnosing patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The
advanced deep learning method, a novel brain imaging technique, was applied in this study to
evaluate its contribution to improving the diagnostic accuracy of AD. Three-dimensional
convolutional neural networks (3D-CNNs) were applied with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
execute binary and ternary disease classification models. The dataset from the Alzheimer's disease
neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) was used to compare the deep learning performances across 3D-CNN,
3D-CNN-support vector machine (SVM) and two-dimensional (2D)-CNN models. The outcomes of accuracy
with ternary classification for 2D-CNN, 3D-CNN and 3D-CNN-SVM were [Formula: see text]%, [Formula:
see text]% and [Formula: see text]% respectively. The 3D-CNN-SVM yielded a ternary classification
accuracy of 93.71%, 96.82% and 96.73% for NC, MCI and AD diagnoses, respectively. Furthermore,
3D-CNN-SVM showed the best performance for binary classification. Our study indicated that 'NC
versus MCI' showed accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 98.90%, 98.90% and 98.80%; 'NC versus
AD' showed accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 99.10%, 99.80% and 98.40%; and 'MCI versus AD'
showed accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of 89.40%, 86.70% and 84.00%, respectively. This study
clearly demonstrates that 3D-CNN-SVM yields better performance with MRI compared to currently
utilized deep learning methods. In addition, 3D-CNN-SVM proved to be efficient without having to
manually perform any prior feature extraction and is totally independent of the variability of
imaging protocols and scanners. This suggests that it can potentially be exploited by untrained
operators and extended to virtual patient imaging data. Furthermore, owing to the safety,
noninvasiveness and nonirradiative properties of the MRI modality, 3D-CNN-SMV may serve as an
effective screening option for AD in the general population. This study holds value in
distinguishing AD and MCI subjects from normal controls and to improve value-based care of patients
in clinical practice.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32498641
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
41) Title: Convolutional neural networks for classification of Alzheimer's disease: Overview and reproducible evaluation.

Authors: Wen, Junhao ; Thibeau-Sutre, Elina ; Diaz-Melo, Mauricio ; Samper-González, Jorge ; Routier, Alexandre ; Bottani, Simona ; Dormont, Didier ; Durrleman, Stanley ; Burgos, Ninon ; Colliot, Olivier ; 

Summary:
Numerous machine learning (ML) approaches have been proposed for automatic classification of
Alzheimer's disease (AD) from brain imaging data. In particular, over 30 papers have proposed to use
convolutional neural networks (CNN) for AD classification from anatomical MRI. However, the
classification performance is difficult to compare across studies due to variations in components
such as participant selection, image preprocessing or validation procedure. Moreover, these studies
are hardly reproducible because their frameworks are not publicly accessible and because
implementation details are lacking. Lastly, some of these papers may report a biased performance due
to inadequate or unclear validation or model selection procedures. In the present work, we aim to
address these limitations through three main contributions. First, we performed a systematic
literature review. We identified four main types of approaches: i) 2D slice-level, ii) 3D patch-
level, iii) ROI-based and iv) 3D subject-level CNN. Moreover, we found that more than half of the
surveyed papers may have suffered from data leakage and thus reported biased performance. Our second
contribution is the extension of our open-source framework for classification of AD using CNN and
T1-weighted MRI. The framework comprises previously developed tools to automatically convert ADNI,
AIBL and OASIS data into the BIDS standard, and a modular set of image preprocessing procedures,
classification architectures and evaluation procedures dedicated to deep learning. Finally, we used
this framework to rigorously compare different CNN architectures. The data was split into
training/validation/test sets at the very beginning and only the training/validation sets were used
for model selection. To avoid any overfitting, the test sets were left untouched until the end of
the peer-review process. Overall, the different 3D approaches (3D-subject, 3D-ROI, 3D-patch)
achieved similar performances while that of the 2D slice approach was lower. Of note, the different
CNN approaches did not perform better than a SVM with voxel-based features. The different approaches
generalized well to similar populations but not to datasets with different inclusion criteria or
demographical characteristics. All the code of the framework and the experiments is publicly
available: general-purpose tools have been integrated into the Clinica software (www.clinica.run)
and the paper-specific code is available at: https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-DL.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32417716
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
42) Title: Brain MRI analysis using a deep learning based evolutionary approach.

Authors: Shahamat, Hossein ; Saniee Abadeh, Mohammad ; 

Summary:
Convolutional neural network (CNN) models have recently demonstrated impressive performance in
medical image analysis. However, there is no clear understanding of why they perform so well, or
what they have learned. In this paper, a three-dimensional convolutional neural network (3D-CNN) is
employed to classify brain MRI scans into two predefined groups. In addition, a genetic algorithm
based brain masking (GABM) method is proposed as a visualization technique that provides new
insights into the function of the 3D-CNN. The proposed GABM method consists of two main steps. In
the first step, a set of brain MRI scans is used to train the 3D-CNN. In the second step, a genetic
algorithm (GA) is applied to discover knowledgeable brain regions in the MRI scans. The
knowledgeable regions are those areas of the brain which the 3D-CNN has mostly used to extract
important and discriminative features from them. For applying GA on the brain MRI scans, a new
chromosome encoding approach is proposed. The proposed framework has been evaluated using ADNI
(including 140 subjects for Alzheimer's disease classification) and ABIDE (including 1000 subjects
for Autism classification) brain MRI datasets. Experimental results show a 5-fold classification
accuracy of 0.85 for the ADNI dataset and 0.70 for the ABIDE dataset. The proposed GABM method has
extracted 6 to 65 knowledgeable brain regions in ADNI dataset (and 15 to 75 knowledgeable brain
regions in ABIDE dataset). These regions are interpreted as the segments of the brain which are
mostly used by the 3D-CNN to extract features for brain disease classification. Experimental results
show that besides the model interpretability, the proposed GABM method has increased final
performance of the classification model in some cases with respect to model parameters.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32259762
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
43) Title: Alzheimer's disease diagnosis from diffusion tensor images using convolutional neural networks.

Authors: Marzban, Eman N ; Eldeib, Ayman M ; Yassine, Inas A ; Kadah, Yasser M ; 

Summary:
Machine learning algorithms are currently being implemented in an escalating manner to classify
and/or predict the onset of some neurodegenerative diseases; including Alzheimer's Disease (AD);
this could be attributed to the fact of the abundance of data and powerful computers. The objective
of this work was to deliver a robust classification system for AD and Mild Cognitive Impairment
(MCI) against healthy controls (HC) in a low-cost network in terms of shallow architecture and
processing. In this study, the dataset included was downloaded from the Alzheimer's disease
neuroimaging initiative (ADNI). The classification methodology implemented was the convolutional
neural network (CNN), where the diffusion maps, and gray-matter (GM) volumes were the input images.
The number of scans included was 185, 106, and 115 for HC, MCI and AD respectively. Ten-fold cross-
validation scheme was adopted and the stacked mean diffusivity (MD) and GM volume produced an AUC of
0.94 and 0.84, an accuracy of 93.5% and 79.6%, a sensitivity of 92.5% and 62.7%, and a specificity
of 93.9% and 89% for AD/HC and MCI/HC classification respectively. This work elucidates the impact
of incorporating data from different imaging modalities; i.e. structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI), where deep learning was employed for the aim of
classification. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study assessing the impact of having
more than one scan per subject and propose the proper maneuver to confirm the robustness of the
system. The results were competitive among the existing literature, which paves the way for
improving medications that could slow down the progress of the AD or prevent it.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32208428
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
44) Title: A multi-model deep convolutional neural network for automatic hippocampus segmentation and classification in Alzheimer's disease.

Authors: Liu, Manhua ; Li, Fan ; Yan, Hao ; Wang, Kundong ; Ma, Yixin ; Shen, Li ; Xu, Mingqing ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive and irreversible brain degenerative disorder. Mild
cognitive impairment (MCI) is a clinical precursor of AD. Although some treatments can delay its
progression, no effective cures are available for AD. Accurate early-stage diagnosis of AD is vital
for the prevention and intervention of the disease progression. Hippocampus is one of the first
affected brain regions in AD. To help AD diagnosis, the shape and volume of the hippocampus are
often measured using structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, these features encode
limited information and may suffer from segmentation errors. Additionally, the extraction of these
features is independent of the classification model, which could result in sub-optimal performance.
In this study, we propose a multi-model deep learning framework based on convolutional neural
network (CNN) for joint automatic hippocampal segmentation and AD classification using structural
MRI data. Firstly, a multi-task deep CNN model is constructed for jointly learning hippocampal
segmentation and disease classification. Then, we construct a 3D Densely Connected Convolutional
Networks (3D DenseNet) to learn features of the 3D patches extracted based on the hippocampal
segmentation results for the classification task. Finally, the learned features from the multi-task
CNN and DenseNet models are combined to classify disease status. Our method is evaluated on the
baseline T1-weighted structural MRI data collected from 97 AD, 233 MCI, 119 Normal Control (NC)
subjects in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. The proposed method
achieves a dice similarity coefficient of 87.0% for hippocampal segmentation. In addition, the
proposed method achieves an accuracy of 88.9% and an AUC (area under the ROC curve) of 92.5% for
classifying AD vs. NC subjects, and an accuracy of 76.2% and an AUC of 77.5% for classifying MCI vs.
NC subjects. Our empirical study also demonstrates that the proposed multi-model method outperforms
the single-model methods and several other competing methods.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31837471
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
45) Title: Classification and Visualization of Alzheimer's Disease using Volumetric Convolutional Neural Network and Transfer Learning.

Authors: Oh, Kanghan ; Chung, Young-Chul ; Kim, Ko Woon ; Kim, Woo-Sung ; Oh, Il-Seok ; 

Summary:
Recently, deep-learning-based approaches have been proposed for the classification of neuroimaging
data related to Alzheimer's disease (AD), and significant progress has been made. However, end-to-
end learning that is capable of maximizing the impact of deep learning has yet to receive much
attention due to the endemic challenge of neuroimaging caused by the scarcity of data. Thus, this
study presents an approach meant to encourage the end-to-end learning of a volumetric convolutional
neural network (CNN) model for four binary classification tasks (AD vs. normal control (NC),
progressive mild cognitive impairment (pMCI) vs. NC, stable mild cognitive impairment (sMCI) vs. NC
and pMCI vs. sMCI) based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and visualizes its outcomes in terms of
the decision of the CNNs without any human intervention. In the proposed approach, we use
convolutional autoencoder (CAE)-based unsupervised learning for the AD vs. NC classification task,
and supervised transfer learning is applied to solve the pMCI vs. sMCI classification task. To
detect the most important biomarkers related to AD and pMCI, a gradient-based visualization method
that approximates the spatial influence of the CNN model's decision was applied. To validate the
contributions of this study, we conducted experiments on the ADNI database, and the results
demonstrated that the proposed approach achieved the accuracies of 86.60% and 73.95% for the AD and
pMCI classification tasks respectively, outperforming other network models. In the visualization
results, the temporal and parietal lobes were identified as key regions for classification.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31796817
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
46) Title: Cortical graph neural network for AD and MCI diagnosis and transfer learning across populations.

Authors: Wee, Chong-Yaw ; Liu, Chaoqiang ; Lee, Annie ; Poh, Joann S ; Ji, Hui ; Qiu, Anqi ; 

Summary:
Combining machine learning with neuroimaging data has a great potential for early diagnosis of mild
cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, it remains unclear how well the
classifiers built on one population can predict MCI/AD diagnosis of other populations. This study
aimed to employ a spectral graph convolutional neural network (graph-CNN), that incorporated
cortical thickness and geometry, to identify MCI and AD based on 3089 T<sub>1</sub>-weighted MRI
data of the ADNI-2 cohort, and to evaluate its feasibility to predict AD in the ADNI-1 cohort
(n = 3602) and an Asian cohort (n = 347). For the ADNI-2 cohort, the graph-CNN showed classification
accuracy of controls (CN) vs. AD at 85.8% and early MCI (EMCI) vs. AD at 79.2%, followed by CN vs.
late MCI (LMCI) (69.3%), LMCI vs. AD (65.2%), EMCI vs. LMCI (60.9%), and CN vs. EMCI (51.8%). We
demonstrated the robustness of the graph-CNN among the existing deep learning approaches, such as
Euclidean-domain-based multilayer network and 1D CNN on cortical thickness, and 2D and 3D CNNs on
T<sub>1</sub>-weighted MR images of the ADNI-2 cohort. The graph-CNN also achieved the prediction on
the conversion of EMCI to AD at 75% and that of LMCI to AD at 92%. The find-tuned graph-CNN further
provided a promising CN vs. AD classification accuracy of 89.4% on the ADNI-1 cohort and >90% on the
Asian cohort. Our study demonstrated the feasibility to transfer AD/MCI classifiers learned from one
population to the other. Notably, incorporating cortical geometry in CNN has the potential to
improve classification performance.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31491832
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
47) Title: RNN-based longitudinal analysis for diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Authors: Cui, Ruoxuan ; Liu, Manhua ; 

Summary:
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an irreversible neurodegenerative disorder with progressive impairment
of memory and other mental functions. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) have been widely used as an
important imaging modality of brain for AD diagnosis and monitoring the disease progression. The
longitudinal analysis of sequential MRIs is important to model and measure the progression of the
disease along the time axis for more accurate diagnosis. Most existing methods extracted the
features capturing the morphological abnormalities of brain and their longitudinal changes using
MRIs and then designed a classifier to discriminate different groups. However, these methods have
several limitations. First, since the feature extraction and classifier model are independent, the
extracted features may not capture the full characteristics of brain abnormalities related to AD.
Second, longitudinal MR images may be missing at some time points for some subjects, which results
in difficulties for extraction of consistent features for longitudinal analysis. In this paper, we
present a classification framework based on combination of convolutional and recurrent neural
networks for longitudinal analysis of structural MR images in AD diagnosis. First, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) is constructed to learn the spatial features of MR images for the
classification task. After that, recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) with cascaded three bidirectional
gated recurrent units (BGRU) layers is constructed on the outputs of CNN at multiple time points for
extracting the longitudinal features for AD classification. Instead of independently performing
feature extraction and classifier training, the proposed method jointly learns the spatial and
longitudinal features and disease classifier, which can achieve optimal performance. In addition,
the proposed method can model the longitudinal analysis using RNN from the imaging data at various
time points. Our method is evaluated with the longitudinal T1-weighted MR images of 830 participants
including 198 AD, 403 mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 229 normal controls (NC) subjects from
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Experimental results show that the
proposed method achieves classification accuracy of 91.33% for AD vs. NC and 71.71% for pMCI vs.
sMCI, demonstrating the promising performance for longitudinal MR image analysis.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30763637
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
48) Title: Automated classification of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment using a single MRI and deep neural networks.

Authors: Basaia, Silvia ; Agosta, Federica ; Wagner, Luca ; Canu, Elisa ; Magnani, Giuseppe ; Santangelo, Roberto ; Filippi, Massimo ; 

Summary:
We built and validated a deep learning algorithm predicting the individual diagnosis of Alzheimer's
disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment who will convert to AD (c-MCI) based on a single cross-
sectional brain structural MRI scan. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were applied on 3D
T1-weighted images from ADNI and subjects recruited at our Institute (407 healthy controls [HC],
418 AD, 280 c-MCI, 533 stable MCI [s-MCI]). CNN performance was tested in distinguishing AD, c-MCI
and s-MCI. High levels of accuracy were achieved in all the classifications, with the highest rates
achieved in the AD vs HC classification tests using both the ADNI dataset only (99%) and the
combined ADNI + non-ADNI dataset (98%). CNNs discriminated c-MCI from s-MCI patients with an
accuracy up to 75% and no difference between ADNI and non-ADNI images. CNNs provide a powerful tool
for the automatic individual patient diagnosis along the AD continuum. Our method performed well
without any prior feature engineering and regardless the variability of imaging protocols and
scanners, demonstrating that it is exploitable by not-trained operators and likely to be
generalizable to unseen patient data. CNNs may accelerate the adoption of structural MRI in routine
practice to help assessment and management of patients.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30584016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
49) Title: Hierarchical Fully Convolutional Network for Joint Atrophy Localization and Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis Using Structural MRI.

Authors: Lian, Chunfeng ; Liu, Mingxia ; Zhang, Jun ; Shen, Dinggang ; 

Summary:
Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) has been widely used for computer-aided diagnosis of
neurodegenerative disorders, e.g., Alzheimer's disease (AD), due to its sensitivity to morphological
changes caused by brain atrophy. Recently, a few deep learning methods (e.g., convolutional neural
networks, CNNs) have been proposed to learn task-oriented features from sMRI for AD diagnosis, and
achieved superior performance than the conventional learning-based methods using hand-crafted
features. However, these existing CNN-based methods still require the pre-determination of
informative locations in sMRI. That is, the stage of discriminative atrophy localization is isolated
to the latter stages of feature extraction and classifier construction. In this paper, we propose a
hierarchical fully convolutional network (H-FCN) to automatically identify discriminative local
patches and regions in the whole brain sMRI, upon which multi-scale feature representations are then
jointly learned and fused to construct hierarchical classification models for AD diagnosis. Our
proposed H-FCN method was evaluated on a large cohort of subjects from two independent datasets
(i.e., ADNI-1 and ADNI-2), demonstrating good performance on joint discriminative atrophy
localization and brain disease diagnosis.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30582529
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
50) Title: Decision Supporting Model for One-year Conversion Probability from MCI to AD using CNN and SVM.

Authors: Shen, Ting ; Jiang, Jiehui ; Li, Yupeng ; Wu, Ping ; Zuo, Chuantao ; Yan, Zhuangzhi ; 

Summary:
Prediction of Alzheimer's disease (AD) from Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) has become popular in
recent years. Especially, deep learning technique has been used to extract high-quality features and
for classification in this topic. Whether the patient would converse from MCI into AD is a
particular evaluation criteria in clinics. However, there is no such a conversion prediction model
in literature. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to propose a decision supporting model based
on deep learning and machine learning to predict the conversion probability from MCI into AD within
one year. We analyzed 165 samples with MRI scans from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) database, in which all MCI patients were converted into AD in different time span for
conversion. In this model, we first extracted image features based on convolutional neural network
(CNN) method, and then we used support vector machine (SVM) classifier to classify these features.
The results showed that the classification accuracy using linear, polynomial and RBF kernel could
achieve 91.0%, 90.0% and 92.3%. As a result, this study indicated that the decision supporting model
is potential to be applied into predicting the conversion probability from MCI into AD within one
year.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30440502
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
51) Title: Multi-Modality Cascaded Convolutional Neural Networks for Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis.

Authors: Liu, Manhua ; Cheng, Danni ; Wang, Kundong ; Wang, Yaping ; 

Summary:
Accurate and early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) plays important role for patient care and
development of future treatment. Structural and functional neuroimages, such as magnetic resonance
images (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET), are providing powerful imaging modalities to
help understand the anatomical and functional neural changes related to AD. In recent years, machine
learning methods have been widely studied on analysis of multi-modality neuroimages for quantitative
evaluation and computer-aided-diagnosis (CAD) of AD. Most existing methods extract the hand-craft
imaging features after image preprocessing such as registration and segmentation, and then train a
classifier to distinguish AD subjects from other groups. This paper proposes to construct cascaded
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn the multi-level and multimodal features of MRI and PET
brain images for AD classification. First, multiple deep 3D-CNNs are constructed on different local
image patches to transform the local brain image into more compact high-level features. Then, an
upper high-level 2D-CNN followed by softmax layer is cascaded to ensemble the high-level features
learned from the multi-modality and generate the latent multimodal correlation features of the
corresponding image patches for classification task. Finally, these learned features are combined by
a fully connected layer followed by softmax layer for AD classification. The proposed method can
automatically learn the generic multi-level and multimodal features from multiple imaging modalities
for classification, which are robust to the scale and rotation variations to some extent. No image
segmentation and rigid registration are required in pre-processing the brain images. Our method is
evaluated on the baseline MRI and PET images of 397 subjects including 93 AD patients, 204 mild
cognitive impairment (MCI, 76 pMCI +128 sMCI) and 100 normal controls (NC) from Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Experimental results show that the proposed method achieves
an accuracy of 93.26% for classification of AD vs. NC and 82.95% for classification pMCI vs. NC,
demonstrating the promising classification performance.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29572601
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
52) Title: Alzheimer's disease diagnostics by a 3D deeply supervised adaptable convolutional network.

Authors: Hosseini-Asl, Ehsan ; Ghazal, Mohammed ; Mahmoud, Ali ; Aslantas, Ali ; Shalaby, Ahmed M ; Casanova, Manual F ; Barnes, Gregory N ; Gimel'farb, Georgy ; Keynton, Robert ; El-Baz, Ayman ; 

Summary:
Early diagnosis is playing an important role in preventing progress of the Alzheimer's disease (AD).
This paper proposes to improve the prediction of AD with a deep 3D Convolutional Neural Network
(3D-CNN), which can show generic features capturing AD biomarkers extracted from brain images, adapt
to different domain datasets, and accurately classify subjects with improved fine-tuning method. The
3D-CNN is built upon a convolutional autoencoder, which is pre-trained to capture anatomical shape
variations in structural brain MRI scans for source domain. Fully connected upper layers of the
3D-CNN are then fine-tuned for each task-specific AD classification in target domain. In this paper,
deep supervision algorithm is used to improve the performance of already proposed 3D Adaptive CNN.
Experiments on the ADNI MRI dataset without skull-stripping preprocessing have shown that the
proposed 3D Deeply Supervised Adaptable CNN outperforms several proposed approaches, including
3D-CNN model, other CNN-based methods and conventional classifiers by accuracy and robustness.
Abilities of the proposed network to generalize the features learnt and adapt to other domains have
been validated on the CADDementia dataset.

Link:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28930562
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
